---
layout: post
title: What I allow to shape me
categories:
- IRL
tags:
- Trust
- Philosophical
comments: true
---

It is impossible for any human to take in all the information available to us.
As new technologies emerge, both the amount and pace at which information hit us
keeps increasing. With an abundance of information, how do we choose which we
allow our attention to absorb and which to ignore?

People in the "old days" might hungrily await news and gossip from a traveller
passing through because of information scarcity. The information given to
people, would be weighted based on the trustworthiness of its origin. A
stranger, a recurring visitor with a tendency to exaggerate, an elder, a child,
a spouse, a priest etc.

The information abundance increasingly require some sort of curation, and it
seems to have become the norm to outsource information curation to social media
platforms for many people. I find that to be a huge problem. Social media
doesn't have my best interest at heart, instead they curate for maximum
engagement (profit). Social media aren't interested in a nuanced debate, because
a nuanced debate does not flair up emotions, causing even more engagement and
time spend on the platform.

Personally I need help navigating the endless amounts of informaiton and I have disqualified Social Media. What to do?

I don't know exactly how to get only the "good stuff", but I have found a few
simple rules to filter out A LOT of the bad stuff.


## Avoid "news" playing on my negative emotions

Feeling contempt and anger are usually clear signs that engagement is of higher
priority than nuances. We all know the clickbait headlines, and I have found
that if I want high-quality news, I will have to pay for them. Luckily, I've
found a great Danish online news media delivering all their articles as audio.
Great for listening to on the road or while doing chores around the house.
Thanks [Zetland][1].


## Avoid engaging in binary discussions

The binary discussion phenomenon (I am right and you are wrong) seems to be the
very essence of Social Media. I have tried using Social Media on several
occasions and find myself being drawn into these threads, even though I am
actually trying to avoid them. Either I cannot identify these threads
beforehand, or the dopamine release is just too high for me to skip them.
Regardless, it is a scary feeling out of control.

I've come to the conclusion that avoiding Social Media as much as possible,
works for me.


## Heed little value to opinions from fixed mindsets

People who are absolutely certain that they are always right, can of course be
right. But such certainty is a danger signal to me. A binary worldview is
comfortable for the brain because it is easy - I am right, you are wrong. But
the world isn't binary. Good or evil. The world is complex and nuanced.

The lack of acknowledging this complexity often results in "absolute certainty".
The more you know, the less you realize you know, and uncertainty would be a
natural reaction to this realization. If the people I am listening to, aren't
open to the possibility that they could be wrong, I need to apply a healthy
amount of uncertainty for them.


## Wrap up

So other than avoiding using social media as much as possible, and listening to
friends and family with a critical mindset. I have found a few curated sources
that I follow regularly, who have earned my trust:
- [Zetland][1] - a Danish online news media
- [Making Sense with Sam Harris][2] - philosophical dialogs about different
  aspects of society
- [Schøtministeriet][3] - Danish comedian criticizing Danish politics and society
- [You are not so smart][4] - a show about psychology that explore reasoning, biases, judgments, and decision-making.

I also really enjoyed the book *Sapiens* by Yuval Noah Harari and I am currently reading the followup *Homo Deus*.

As always - find the balance between being open-minded and being critical.


[1]: https://www.zetland.dk/
[2]: https://www.samharris.org/
[3]: https://podcasts.google.com/feed/aHR0cHM6Ly9mZWVkLnBvZGJlYW4uY29tL3NjaG9ldG1pbmlzdGVyaWV0L2ZlZWQueG1s
[4]: https://podcasts.google.com/feed/aHR0cHM6Ly9mZWVkcy5zaW1wbGVjYXN0LmNvbS9ONWVLRHhKSQ