---
layout: post
title: Who am I
categories:
- IRL
tags:
- Philosophical
comments: false
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I am many things.

Upon reflecting the following words come to mind:
husband, father, son, colleague, friend, philosophical, idealist, perfectionist, patient, empathetic, respectful, forgiving, fair, fearful, stubborn

<!--more-->

Fairness permeates almost every conscious decision I make.
I try to split my person between all my roles, both family and otherwise,
so everyone gets attention - that is fair.
I reflect on my roles and how I become better at them.
I want people around me to be their best version of themselves,
and if I cannot help them at least I should not be in their way.

I do fail from time to time. Mostly due to fear, anxiety and stubbornness.
When I do fail, I try to forgive myself - just like I would forgive other people failing me.
For reasons unknown to me it is harder to forgive myself than other people 🤔
Is it connected to the perfectionist in me?
Always striving for the unattainable ideal
and getting disappointed when it unavoidably fails.

I feel the pain of others, both physical and psychological. Being around negative energy brings me down. Maybe I am also selfish... Do I solely try to make other people feel good so I can feel good myself?
Regardless of the reasons, I want them to feel good
and the most effective tools I found are respect and attention.
It brings me so much joy to see them straighten their back, being proud, wanting to put in effort and smiling with their eyes.

I sometimes wonder how other people see me...
If they perceive me how I would like to be perceived,
and notice the things that I put the most effort into,
Perhaps I am unaware of unconscious behavior, that is more salient.

I should ask - but will I like the answer?